>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 31...
CONFLICT IN UKRAINE CONTINUES AS
MILITARY PRISONERS ARE EXCHANGED
OVERNIGHT.
>> IT'S BEEN A HUGE INFLUX OF
RUSSIAN FIGHTERS OF HEAVY
WEAPONS AND EVEN RUSSIAN REGULAR
TROOPS.
>> Sreenivasan: EBOLA'S LETHAL
EFFECT AND ITS STRAIN ON THE
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM IN WEST
AFRICA.
AND AN EXPERIMENTAL NEW DRUG FOR
HEART PATIENTS THAT MIGHT
DRAMATICALLY IMPROVE SURVIVAL
RATES.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
UKRAINE CONTINUES TO BE A
FLASHPOINT-- OFFICIALS THERE SAY
A NAVY VESSEL CAME UNDER FIRE
EARLIER TODAY FROM PRO-RUSSIAN
REBELS ON SHORE.
BUT OVERNIGHT, THERE WAS A RARE
MOMENT OF COOPERATION BETWEEN
RUSSIA AND UKRAINE.
IN AN EXCHANGE AT THE BORDER,
NINE RUSSIAN SOLDIERS WERE
SWAPPED FOR 63 UKRAINIAN
SOLDIERS.
ALL THIS AS THE EUROPEAN UNION
DRAWS UP TOUGHER SANCTIONS ON
RUSSIA.
AND THE UKRAINIAN PORT CITY OF
MARIUPOL CONTINUED TO BRACE FOR
AN ATTACK FROM PRO-RUSSIAN
FIGHTERS WHO HAVE MADE ADVANCES
IN THE AREA THIS WEEK.
WHILE SOME RESIDENTS OF MARIUPOL
HAVE FLED, OTHERS HAVE TAKEN TO
THE STREETS TO DEMONSTRATE
SUPPORT FOR THE UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT.
FOR THE LATEST WE ARE JOINED VIA
SKYPE FROM MARIUPOL, UKRAINE BY
JAMES MARSON OF THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL.
LET'S TALK ABOUT THAT PRISONER
EXCHANGE IS THIS A SIGNAL THAT
TENSIONS ARE EASING?
>> WELL IT IS A SIGN THAT THE
UKRAINIAN ARMY IS ON THE BACK
FOOT.
GROUND ARE SAYING IS THERE HAVE
BEEN A HUGE INFLUX OF RUSSIAN
FIGHTERS OF RUSSIAN HEAVY
WEAPONS AND EVEN OF RUSSIAN
REGULAR TROOPS, WHICH IS REALLY
TURNED THE TIDE.
AND SUDDENLY, WHERE UKRAINE
HAVE BEEN ADVANCING THEY ARE
RETREATING.
A LOT OF SOLDIERS HAVE GOTTEN
TRAPPED, BECOME PRISONERS AND
SEVERAL DOZENS OF UKRAINIAN
SOLDIERS HAVE BEEN KILLED.
>> THERE IS A RUSSIAN
SPOKESPERSON TODAY THAT SAID
THAT EASTERN UKRAINE SHOULD
REMAIN PART OF UKRAINE.
HOW DOES A COMMENT PLAY LIKE
THAT IN THIS CLIMATE?
>> I BELIEVE, YOU ARE REFER TO
THE PRESIDENT'S SPOKESMAN.
BECAUSE PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
SAID UKRAINE SHOULD BEGIN TALKS
ON THE POTENTIAL STATE HOOD OF
SOME OF THIS REGION, NEW RUSSIA,
NOW, THERE ARE MANY DIFFERENT
INTERPRETATIONS CAN YOU MAKE OF
THAT BUT THAT'S SEEMED TO
INDICATE THAT HE IS IN FAVOR OF
THIS PART OF THE COUNTRY,
BECOMING AN INDEPENDENT STATE,
NOT PART OF UKRAINE.
AND THEN, THIS COMMENT BY THE
SPOKESMAN APPEARS TO SAY THE
OPPOSITE.
IT IS NOT CLEAR WHAT'S GOING ON.
>> YOU WERE ON THE FRONT LINES
REPORTING YESTERDAY, WHAT DID
YOU SEE VERSUS WHAT THE KREMLIN
WAS SAYING?
>> IT SEEMS TO BE THAT THE
UKRAINIAN ARMY IS IN A VERY
DIFFICULT STATE NOW.
ONE TOWN VERY CLOSE TO THE FRONT
LINE, AND RESIDENTS WERE TELLING
ME THAT THROUGHOUT THE ENTIRE
DAY SOLDIERS, UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS
HAD BEEN LIMPING BACK FROM
BEHIND THE FRONT LINES.
A LOT OF UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS GOT
TRAPPED -- SOLDIERS GOT TRAPPED
FROM THIS ADVANCE.
THEY TRIED TO MAKE IT BACK
THROUGH THE FIELDS AND FORESTS.
THEY SAID THESE SOLDIERS WERE IN
TERRIBLE STATE, VERY BLOODY,
LOTS OF INJURED PEOPLE AND THEY
WERE SIMPLY TRYING TO MAKE IT
OUT, AND AS WE WERE LEAVING WE
SAW A CONVEY OF ABOUT TEN
AMBULANCES STUFFED FULL OF
UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS IN A TERRIBLE
STATE.
SIGNIFICANT FORCES IN OTHER
PARTS OF THE NORTH AND WEST
THEY SEEM TO BE MOVING VERY
SLOWLY, FROM THE UNITS THAT HAVE
BEEN PUSHED BACKWARDS.
>> YOU ALSO SPOKE WITH
UKRAINIANS WHO ARE LOSING FAITH
FROM HELP FROM THE WEST.
WHAT ARE THEY INTERESTED IN?
>> THEY SAID THEY HAVE MADE
THEIR EUROPEAN CHOICES AS A
COUNTRY.
THERE WERE PROTESTS SEVERAL
MONTHS AGO THROUGH A PRO-RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT WHO WAS UNPOPULAR.
SAID WE HAVE MADE OUR CHOICE,
WHERE IS THE SUPPORT FROM THE
WEST, FROM EUROPE, FROM THE
UNITED STATES THEY SAY THEY NEED
WEAPONS THAT WILL ENABLE THEM TO
PUSH BACK WHAT THEY SAY IS AN
ADVANCE AGAINST RUSSIAN REGULAR
TROOPS, AGAINST IS TANKS AN
ARTILLERY, VERY FORMIDABLE
WEAPONS.
THEY SAID TO ME WE HAVE
ENTHUSIASM AND RIFLES BUT THEY
DON'T HELP YOU MUCH AGAINST
TANKS.
>> JAMES MARSON JOINING US VIA
SKYPE FROM MARIUPOL, THANKS.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AS PRESIDENT
OBAMA WORKS ON A PLAN TO COMBAT
THE MILITANT GROUP THE ISLAMIC
STATE, LAWMAKERS FROM BOTH SIDES
OF THE AISLE ARE QUESTIONING THE
PRESIDENT'S TIMELINE.
>> I'VE LEARNED ONE THING ABOUT
THIS PRESIDENT, AND THAT IS HE
IS VERY CAUTIOUS.
MAYBE IN THIS INSTANCE TOO
CAUTIOUS.
>> WE CAN'T WAIT FOREVER, AND
THE LONGER WE DO WAIT, THE
STRONGER ISIS BECOMES, MORE
PEOPLE ARE MASSACRED, AND THE
MORE AMERICA AND BRITAIN BECOME
AT RISK.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
WILL BE TRAVELLING TO EASTERN
EUROPE THIS WEEK AND WILL ALSO
ATTEND THE NATO SUMMIT IN WALES,
WHERE HE WILL LIKELY DISCUSS THE
ISLAMIC STATE WITH OTHER NATO
MEMBERS.
HUNDREDS OF YAZIDI WOMEN
KIDNAPPED BY THE ISLAMIC STATE
HAVE BEEN HANDED TO MEMBERS OF
THE GROUP, ACCORDING TO A UK-
BASED ORGANIZATION WHICH
MONITORS THE CRISIS.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAID AT LEAST 27 WOMEN
HAD BEEN SOLD AND MARRIED FOR
ABOUT $1,000 AND ABOUT 300 WERE
KIDNAPPED.
THE ORGANIZATION SAID THE WOMEN,
CONSIDERED "INFIDELS" BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE, WERE FORCED TO
CONVERT TO ISLAM BEFORE
MARRIAGE.
IRAQI FORCES HAVE REPORTEDLY
REACHED THE TOWN OF AMIRLI
BREAKING A TWO MONTH SIEGE BY
ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS.
THE U.S. CONDUCTED AIR STRIKES
OVERNIGHT AND PROVIDED AID ALONG
WITH BRITAIN, AUSTRALIA AND
FRANCE.
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS HAVE BEEN
EFFECTIVELY TRAPPED SINCE JULY
WHEN MILITANTS ENCIRCLED THE
AREA AND CUT OFF WATER AND
SUPPLIES.
IN GOLAN HEIGHTS, 40 FILIPINO
U.N. PEACEKEEPERS, TRAPPED BY
FIERCE FIGHTING WITH ISLAMIC
MILITANTS, MANAGED TO ESCAPE
OVERNIGHT.
THE ESCAPE COMES AS 44 FIJIAN
U.N. PEACEKEEPERS ARE STILL
BEING HELD BY THE NUSRA FRONT AN
ISLAMIC MILITANT GROUP, THE SAME
GROUP THAT RELEASED AMERICAN
THEO CURTIS LAST WEEK.
FIJI'S ARMY CHIEF SAID
NEGOTIATIONS ARE UNDERWAY TO
FIND AND SECURE THE RELEASE OF
THE PEACEKEEPERS.
NUSRA FRONT MILITANTS POSTED A
MESSAGE THAT THE ACT WAS IN
RETALIATION FOR THE U.N.'S
APATHY TOWARDS MUSLIM SUFFERING
AT THE HANDS OF SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR ASSAD.
IN LIBYA, AN ISLAMIC MILITIA
GROUP HAS SAID IT HAS "SECURED"
A U.S. EMBASSY COMPOUND IN THE
CAPITAL CITY TRIPOLI.
U.S. PERSONNEL WERE EVACUATED
FROM THE EMBASSY LAST MONTH DUE
TO INCREASING VIOLENCE AND
INSTABILITY IN THE COUNTRY.
A COMMANDER FOR THE "DAWN OF
LIBYA" TOLD AN ASSOCIATED PRESS
REPORTER, WHO WAS ALLOWED ACCESS
TO THE SITE, THAT HIS GROUP HAD
TAKEN CONTROL OF THE COMPOUND
LAST WEEK.
IN PAKISTAN, ONGOING PROTESTS
TOOK A VIOLENT TURN WHEN AT
LEAST THREE PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND UP TO 400 INJURED OVERNIGHT.
THOUSANDS CLASHED WITH POLICE IN
AN ATTEMPT TO RAID PRIME
MINISTER'S NAWAZ SHARIF'S HOME.
THEY ARE DEMANDING HE STEP DOWN
OVER ALLEGATIONS OF VOTING
FRAUD.
DEMONSTRATORS THREW STONES AND
BRICKS AT POLICE OUTSIDE THE
PRIME MINISTER'S RESIDENCE.
THE POLICE SAID THEY HAD NO
CHOICE BUT TO RESPOND WITH
FORCE.
LED BY OPPOSITION POLITICIAN
IMRAN KHAN AND CLERIC TAHIR-UL-
QADRI, THE PROTESTS BEGAN ON,
AUGUST 14-- PAKISTAN'S
INDEPENDENCE DAY-- AND HAVE
GAINED THOUSANDS OF SUPPORTERS.
SHARIF, WHO WON OFFICE LAST YEAR
IN PAKISTAN'S FIRST DEMOCRATIC
HAND OVER OF POWER AND IS
BACKED BY PARLIAMENT, HAS
REFUSED TO STEP DOWN.
THE SHOWBOAT CASINO IN ATLANTIC
CITY CLOSES ITS DOORS TODAY, THE
FIRST OF THREE SCHEDULED TO DO
SO IN THE COMING WEEKS.
WHEN THE REVEL AND THE TRUMP
PLAZA ALSO SHUT DOWN THE
CLOSINGS ARE PROJECTED TO COST
THE REGION 8,000 JOBS.
THE SHOWBOAT, WHILE STILL
PROFITABLE, HAS BEEN FACING
DECREASING REVENUE AND MORE
COMPETITION.
AS MANY AS 250 HOMES ARE BEING
EVACUATED IN NORTHERN CALIFORNIA
AS TWO WILDFIRES, SPARKED BY
LIGHTNING THREE WEEKS AGO,
CONTINUE TO GROW.
THE FIRES, STOKED BY WEATHER
CONDITIONS, MERGED ON SATURDAY
MORNING AND BURNED MORE THAN 90
SQUARE MILES.
THE HOMES ARE NEAR THE RURAL
TOWN OF HAPPY CAMP NEAR KLAMATH
NATIONAL FOREST.
AND JUST SOUTHWEST OF NAPA
CALIFORNIA, A 3.2 AFTERSHOCK
HAVE RATTLED THE VALLEY EARLY
THIS MORNING.
THERE WERE NO REPORTS OF DAMAGE.
THIS AFTER LAST WEEK'S 6.0
MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE, WHICH WAS
THE LARGEST IN THE REGION IN 25
YEARS.
THAT QUAKE INJURED MORE THAN 200
PEOPLE.
ICELAND'S BARDARBUNGA VOLCANO IS
ACTING UP AFTER YESTERDAY'S 5.4
MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE STRUCK THAT
REGION.
LAVA LINES FLOWED ALONG THE
VOLCANIC FISSURE TODAY,
PROMPTING A HIGH ALERT LEVEL
WHICH WAS LATER LOWERED.
DESPITE THE VOLCANO'S ACTIVITY,
THERE WAS NO ASH CLOUD AND
AIRPORTS REMAIN OPEN.
THE SPREAD OF THE MOST RECENT
STRAIN OF THE EBOLA VIRUS ACROSS
PARTS OF WEST AFRICA HAS
HIGHLIGHTED NOT JUST THE
LETHALITY OF THE DISEASE BUT
ALSO THE STRAINS ON THE EXISTING
MEDICAL INFRASTRUCTURE THERE.
FOR FURTHER INSIGHT, YESTERDAY I
SPOKE WITH STEPHEN MORSE,
PROFESSOR OF EPIDEMIOLOGY AT THE
MAILMAN SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH
AT COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY AND
ESTRELLA LASRY, TROPICAL
MEDICINE ADVISOR AT DOCTORS
WITHOUT BORDERS.
>> FIRST, WHY IS THIS STRAIN SO
MUCH MORE LETHAL COMPARED TO
OTHERS?
WE'RE TALKING 3,000 PEOPLE
INFECTED, 1,500 DEAD.
>> I DON'T THINK IT IS MORE
LETHAL FROM OTHER STRAINS OF
EBOLA ZAIRE.
I THINK THE PROBLEM IS THERE ARE
A LARGE NUMBER OF PEOPLE GETTING
INFECTED AND PEOPLE ARE NOT
GETTING CARE AT THE APPROPRIATE
TIMES.
BUT I DON'T BELIEVE
BIOLOGICALLY, IT IS BEHAVING
FASTER THAN THE ONES WE KNOW
ABOUT.
>> IS THERE A SOCIAL COMPONENT
OF SPREADING FASTER?
>> I THINK INITIAL PLAY, THE
OUT-- INITIALLY, THE OUTBREAK IN
GUINEA, THERE WERE SO MANY
PATIENTS IT BEGAN TO SPREAD
ACROSS THE BORDERS.
SO OVER TIME, THE ORGANIZATION
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS WERE
ABLE TO START ON IT IN THE
SPRING THERE WERE SO MANY CASES
IT WAS AN UPHILL BATTLE.
>> WHY HASN'T THE INTERNATIONAL
KIND OF EFFORT TO TRY TO COMBAT
THIS BEEN SO MUCH SLOWER THAN
WHAT WE'VE HEARD IN THE PAST?
YOUR ORGANIZATION IS ONE OF THE
LAST ONES THERE, YOU HAVE A
NUMBER OF PEOPLE THERE BUT YOU
DON'T SEE THE SAME KIND OF PUSH
FROM LOT OF INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS GOING IN.
>> USUALLY THE OUTBREAKS ARE NOT
AS BIG AS THIS ONE.
WE START ED TO MONITOR IT AND
FINISH IN TWO, THREE MONTHS
WHICH IS WHAT WE USUALLY SEE IN
AN EBOLA OUTBREAK, WHAT WE HAVE
RESPONDED TO IN THE PAST, PART
OF THE PROBLEM WITH THIS
OUTBREAK IS IT SPREAD VERY
QUICKLY IN AN URBAN AREA.
WHICH MEANT THAT IT WAS MUCH
MORE DIFFICULT TO CONTROL IN
TERMS OF THE CONTACT TRACING,
MUCH MORE DIFFICULT TO CONTROL
IN TERMS OF HOW QUICKLY IT
SPREAD.
SO IT'S LASTED MUCH MORE THAN
THE PREVIOUS OUTBREAKS AND IT'S
AFFECTED A LOT MORE PEOPLE AND
THAT'S WHY THE ABSOLUTE NEED FOR
MORE ORGANIZATIONS TO GET
INVOLVED IN THE RESPONSE.
>> THIS IS ALSO HIGHLIGHTING
KIND OF A DISPARITY IN POOR
EXISTING MEDICAL INFRASTRUCTURE.
I MEAN SOME OF THESE COUNTRIES
ENTIRE COUNTRIES HAVE LESS
DOCTORS THAN LET'S SAY A SINGLE
LOSS IN A MAJOR WESTERN CITY AND
THERE'S ALSO A DISPARITY BETWEEN
COUNTRIES WHO HAVE DEALT WITH
THIS VIRUS BEFORE VERSUS THOSE
WHO HAVE NOT.
>> YES ABSOLUTELY.
AND THESE COUNTRIES ARE
PARTICULARLY STRESSED BECAUSE
THEY HAVE CIVIL STRIFE, THEY
HAVE TROUBLE BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND THE LOCAL PEOPLE,
THERE'S SOME DISTRUST MUCH
GOVERNMENT.
THAT IS OVERLAID OVER AN ALREADY
DIFFICULT AND STRAINED MEDICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE.
BUT EVEN NIGERIA WHICH IS A VERY
BIG COUNTRY BY COMPARISON HAS
ONLY 17,000 DOCTORS.
>> YOU KNOW HOW SIGNIFICANT IS
THE FEAR FACTOR, THE
MIS-INFORMATION IN SPREADING THE
DECEASE OR CHASING AWAY
CAREGIVERS?
>> IT'S HUGE.
IT'S A BIG PART OF WHY THE
OUTBREAK HAS BEEN SPREADING SO
MUCH.
SO THE FEAR IS CAUSING PEOPLE
NOT TO GO TO HEALTH FACILITIES,
TO HIDE THE DISEASE, TO HIDE
PEOPLE WHO ARE DEAD IN THE
VILLAGES WHO ARE NOT BEING
ACCESS, WHO ARE NOT BEING
GRANTED ACCESS TO SOME OF THE
VILLAGES WHERE YOU THINK THERE
MIGHT BE CASES SO DEFINITELY IT
IS PLAYING A PIVOTAL ROLE WHY
THE DISEASE IS SPREADING AND
THIS IS SPREADING.
>> WHY THE DISTRUST.
WHY NOT LET THE DOCTOR COME IN
THAT YOU HEAR?
>> A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE DIED, A
LOT OF PEOPLE IN ISOLATION WARDS
AND THEY ARE DRESSED IN THE FULL
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT,
THE ASTRONAUT SUITS YOU HAVE
SEEN ON TV AND IT ADDS TO THE
FEAR BRINGING PEOPLE INTO THESE
WARDS.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE TRIED TO DO
IS BRING -- MAKE SURE THAT THE
FAMILY MEMBERS DO HAVE ACCESS TO
SEE THEIR RELATIVES WHO ARE
INSIDE THE WARD, CREATING SOME
KIND OF BEING BASIS WHERE
THERE'S A PHYSICAL BARRIER
BETWEEN THE PATIENT AND THEIR
FAMILY, TO ALLOW THEM TO SEE
THEY ARE INSIDE THE WARD THEY
ARE BEING TAKEN CARE OF AND
WE'RE NOT HIDING THEM.
>> I EVEN SAW REPORTS OF KIND OF
REVERSE CAUSALITY.
EVERYWHERE THESE DOCTORS GO MORE
PEOPLE ARE DYING SO LET'S KEEP
THE DOCTORS OUT.
>> IT IS UNDERSTANDABLE THAT
KIND OF FEAR WOULD BE CREATED.
THE POPULATION TOSS NOT KNOW THE
DISEASE AND NOT USED TO THIS
KIND OF RESPONSE FOR A DISEASE
LIKE THAT.
>> IN ADDITION TO PERHAPS SOME
MISTRUST OF AUTHORITY AND PEOPLE
COMING FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES TO
HELP, SINCE IT HAS SUCH A HIGH
MORTALIT RATE IS FAIRLY HIGH
MANY PEOPLE FEEL THERE IS NO
USE GOING INTO THE HOSPITAL
ANYWAY, IN SOME HOSPITALS OTHER
PATIENTS COULD GET INFECTED SO
THERE'S AN HISTORIC BASIS FOR
THAT.
WE CAN DO BETTER FOR THAT,
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS HAVE
DEMONSTRATED THE IMPROVEMENTS
THAT ARE POSSIBLE EVEN WITH
GENERAL CARE BUT I THINK IT
NEEDS EDUCATING THE PUBLIC ABOUT
THAT.
>> BY THE TIME THEY GET TO THE
HOSPITALS SOMETIMES THEY HAVE
ALREADY INFECTED DOZENS OF
OTHERS.
>> YES.
AND THE CONTACT WITH THE KNOWN
CASE, THE SOONER THAT PERSON IS
IDENTIFIED THE SOONER THEY CAN
BE MONITORED.
SO WHAT IS HAPPENING FOR EVERY
CASE, FOR EVERY CONFIRMED
PATIENT, ALL OF THE PHYSICAL
CONTACTS THEY'VE HAD IN THE LAST
21 DAYS ARE MONITORED ON A DAILY
BASIS.
YOU CAN IMAGINE HOW HUGE THAT
RESPONSE NEEDS TO BE ESPECIALLY
WITH THE AMOUNT OF CASES WE'RE
SEEING BUT NOT EVERYBODY IS
STAYING INTO THE CONTACTS
THEY'VE HAD OR NOT EVERYONE IS
WILLING TO BE FOLLOWED FOR A
DAILY BASIS FOR 21 DAYS.
>> LOOKING AROUND THE CORNER A
BIT, WE'VE HAD SOME PROMISING
RESULTS WITH ZMAPP AND THE
TESTS, HOW CLOSE ARE WE TO A
VACCINE THAT COULD BE
MANUFACTURED AT SCALE AND COULD
ACTUALLY REACH THIS REGION.
>> SCALE IS GOING TO BE A
DIFFICULT PROBLEM EVEN WITH
ZMAPP.
THEY ARE WORKING HARD TO TRY TO
SCALE IT UP JUST TO EXPERIMENTAL
DOSES AND IT'S GOING TO TAKE A
WHILE.
SOME OF THE OTHER DRUGS IN THE
PIPELINE WILL TAKE LONGER
BECAUSE THEY NEED TO BE TESTED.
AS YOU KNOW, THERE IS A VACCINE
CANDIDATE GOING INTO EARLY
TRIALS RIGHT NOW FOR SAFETY
TESTING ESSENTIALLY BUT THEN THE
QUESTION IS YOU KNOW WHAT'S THE
MARKET FOR THAT VACCINE?
I THINK YOU KNOW, PEOPLE WHO ARE
GOING AS HEALTH CARE WORKERS, OR
LAB TECHNICIANS OR OTHERS WHO
WOULD BE DEALING DIRECTLY WITH
PATIENTS, WOULD BE CLEARLY ABLE
AND WILLING TO GET THE VACCINE.
BUT THIS IS SPORADIC.
WE DON'T KNOW WHERE THE NEXT
EBOLA OUTBREAK IS GOING TO OCCUR
SO YOU'RE NEVER QUITE SURE WHO
TO VACCINATE UNTIL IT ACTUALLY
HAPPENS.
>> GIVEN THAT THERE ARE SO FEW
DOCTORS AND SO MANY CASES WHAT
DO YOU DO TO KEEP YOUR OWN STAFF
SAFE?
THEY ARE WORKING UNDER
INCREDIBLE STRESS AND BAD
CONDITIONS.
18 HOURS A DAY, ET CETERA,
ET CETERA, AND THESE MISTAKES
COULD COST THEM THEIR LIVES.
>> THE FIRST THING IS TO TRAIN
PEOPLE BEFORE THEY GO INTO AN
OUTBREAK AND THEN ONCE THEY ARE
IN THE OUTBREAK WE MACK SURE
THEY REALLY UNDERSTAND THE
INFECTION CONTROL METHOD.
ANY TIME THEY FEEL UNSAFE THEY
CAN LEAVE.
WHEN YOU GO ON THE WARD, YOU
HAVE A BUDDY SYSTEM, NEVER GO
ALONE.
YOU DRESS WITH SOMEONE TO MAKE
SURE NO SKIN, NOTHING IS EXPOSED
AND YOU GO INTO A WARD WITH AT
LEAST ONE OTHER PERSON SO THAT
IN CASE YOU'RE ABOUT TO MAKE A
MISTAKE THE OTHER PERSON CAN
ACTUALLY WARN YOU.
SO WE TRY TO KEEP EVERYONE
WITHIN A VERY, VERY STRICT SET
OF RULES BECAUSE THERE'S NO
PLACE FOR MISTAKE.
>> ALL RIGHT, ESTRELLA LASRY,
STEPHEN MORSE, THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW IS THE EBOLA
VIRUS TRANSMITTED FROM HUMAN TO
HUMAN?
LEARN THE SCIENCE BEHIND THE
EPIDEMIC AT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
AS WE REPORTED YESTERDAY, AN
EXPERIMENTAL HEART DRUG
DEVELOPED BY THE SWISS
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY NOVARTIS
SHOWS PROMISING RESULTS.
THE NEW DRUG, CURRENTLY REFERRED
TO BY ITS CODENAME "L C Z 696"
MAY CHANGE THE COURSE OF
TREATMENT AND PROLONG THE LIVES
OF PATIENTS SUFFERING FROM HEART
FAILURE.
THE RESULTS OF THE STUDY ON THE
NEW DRUG ARE BEING PRESENTED
THIS WEEKEND IN SPAIN AT AN
INTERNATIONAL CARDIOLOGY
CONFERENCE AND WERE ALSO
PUBLISHED YESTERDAY BY THE NEW
ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE.
FOR SOME INSIGHT, WE ARE JOINED
VIA SKYPE FROM WINDHAM, NEW
HAMPSHIRE, BY CLYDE YANCY,
PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE AND CHIEF
OF CARDIOLOGY AT NORTHWESTERN
UNIVERSITY.
SO PROFESSOR YANCY, THERE ARE
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE WHO SUFFER
FROM HEART DISEASE AND HEART
FAILURE.
WHAT'S SO DIFFERENT ABOUT THIS
DRUG AND WHY DOES IT WORK BETTER
THAN WHAT'S AVAILABLE TODAY?
>> THANK YOU FOR THE INTEREST.
THERE IS A NEW THERAPY NOW
THAT'S NOT JUST AN ADDITIONAL
THERAPY BUT IT IS A SIGNIFICANT
IMPROVEMENT OVER WHAT WE ALREADY
HAD.
THIS REALLY IS BETTER, AND
BRINGS A LOT OF HOPE TO A LOT OF
PEOPLE.
>> AND WITHOUT GETTING TOO FAR
INTO THE DETAILS OR THE SCIENCE,
WHAT'S IT DOING TO THE HEART TO
MAKE IT MORE EFFICIENT OR LESS
PRONE TO FAIL?
>> SO THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
IT TAKES WHAT WE WERE ORIGINALLY
DOING WHICH WAS TO USE DRUGS TO
HELP MAKE THE HEART SMALLER AND
STRONGER BUT TAKES IT A STEP
FURTHER.
NOT ONLY DOES IT HELP TO MAKE
THE HEART SMALLER OR STRONGER
BUT IT REDUCE HE OR MINIMIZES
SOME OF THE SCAR THAT HAPPENS
OVER TIME.
BY COMBINING THESE TWO EFFECTS
TOGETHER, IT REALLY HAS A
PROFOUND BENEFIT ON LIVING
LONGER AND FEELING BETTER.
>> WILL THESE REPLACE WHAT WE
HAVE TODAY, ACE INHIBITORS OR
BETA BLOCKERS?
>> THIS CHANGES THE FOUNDATION
WHICH MEANS IT RAISES THE BAR
FOR ALL PATIENTS.
WE DO THINK THAT MANY PATIENTS
WILL HAVE THEIR ACE INHIBITORS
REPLACE BY THIS NEW LCC DRUG
ONCE IT'S DEVELOPED FURTHER.
BUT IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO
REALIZE THAT THE BACKGROUND
THERAPY STILL INCLUDES DRUGS
THAT MAKE DIFFERENCE LIKE BETA
BLOCKERS AND MRAs SO LOTS OF
REASON FOR ENTHUSIASM HERE.
>> SO WHILE THIS ONE COMPANY HAS
A LEAD HERE HOW LONG BEFORE THIS
CATEGORY OF DRUGS GETS ON THE
MARKETS AND ON STORE SHELVES SO
TO SPEAK WHERE DOCTORS CAN WRITE
A PRESCRIPTION FOR THEM IN THE
U.S.?
>> GO BEYOND WHICH COMPANY HAS
PROPRIETARY INTEREST HERE AND
REALIZE THIS IS REALLY A BREAK
THROUGH FOR PATIENTS.
WHICH MEANS WE HAVE TO CHANGE
THE DYNAMIC HERE.
WE HAVE TO LOOK TO THE FDA, WORK
WITH THE FDA, HOW CAN WE BRING
THIS DEVELOPMENT TO THE TABLE
SOONER AND BETTER THAN WE'VE
EVER DONE BEFORE.
I'M EXCITED ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF HELPING TO
GALVANIZE INTEREST AND GET THIS
DRUG TO PATIENTS AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE.
>> YOU KNOW SOME PEOPLE ARE
CONCERNED THAT PERHAPS IT'S TOO
QUICK.
I MEAN I DON'T KNOW WHAT THE
MEDICAL ETHICS OF IT IS WHEN YOU
HAVE THIS KIND OF EFFICACY, WHEN
YOU WANT TO GET THE DRUG OUT AND
HELP PEOPLE, ARE THERE
PARTICULAR POPULATIONS THAT
HAVEN'T BEEN STUDIED ENOUGH?
>> YOU KNOW HARI THE ANSWER IS
YES AND YES.
BUT IT DOESN'T DROP OUR INTEREST
OR QUELL OUR ENTHUSIASM.
WE NEED TO MOVE FORWARD FOR
HEART DISEASE THAT'S CLEAR.
YES THERE ARE PATIENTS WE WISH
WE KNEW MORE ABOUT, LIKE AFRICAN
AMERICAN PATIENTS, LIKE NEW
PATIENTS WITH ADVANCED HEART
FAILURE.
BUT THERE ARE WAYS USING
CONTEMPORARY RESEARCH
PHILOSOPHIES, THIS IS NOT ABOUT
A COMPANY, THIS IS ABOUT A
BRAND-NEW WAY TO TAKE CARE OF
PEOPLE THAT HAVE A PRETTY
COMPELLING DISEASE.
IF THE DISEASE WASN'T SO
COMPELLING SURE WE COULD SLOW
DOWN TAKE MORE TIME GET MORE
DATA.
BUT WE'VE GOT A DISEASE WHERE
PEOPLE ARE COMING UP SHORT
DESPITE GETTING EVERYTHING
EVERYTHING WE HAVE NOW.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR INTEREST.
APPRECIATE IT.
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER THIS
WEEK HIGH SCHOOLERS WHO ARE PART
OF THE NEWSHOUR'S STUDENT
REPORTING LABS SHARED THEIR
OPINIONS ON JUSTICE AND RACE IN
AMERICA FOLLOWING THE SHOOTING
OF MICHAEL BROWN AND THE
VIOLENCE IN FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
HERE ARE MORE VOICES FROM THAT
REPORT.
>> I FEEL LIKE AFTER HEARING
ABOUT THIS SITUATION, I REALIZE
IF WE HAVE TO PROTEST THE
KILLING OF UNARMED YOUTH IN OUR
COUNTRY WE DON'T LIVE IN A FREE
COUNTRY AT ALL.
>> THE COLOR OF OUR SKIN WHETHER
YOU'RE WHITE MEXICAN BLACK
INDIAN, WE SHOULD HAVE THE SAME
JUSTICE.
IT DOESN'T ADD UP TO ME.
>> I FEEL LIKE FERGUSON WAS LIKE
A TRUE SHOWING OF WHAT THE
NATION TRULY FEELS ABOUT
EQUALITY.
BETWEEN MINORITIES, AND THE
MAJORITIES, IN CERTAIN
COMMUNITIES.
>> SOMETHING LET ME KNOW THAT
JUSTICE AND RACE ARE STILL A BIG
TOPIC FOCUS ON AMERICA, THAT
RACISM IS STILL SOMETHING THAT
EXISTS AND EQUALITY AMONGST
RACES THEMSELVES AREN'T FULLY
MELT YET.
>> AFTER FERGUSON I FOUND A
MAGAZINE FROM JULY 30, 2001.
THIS MAGAZINE BROUGHT TO MY
ATTENTION THAT EVEN SINCE 2001
RACIAL PROFILING HAS BEEN STILL
PRESENT AND OUR GOVERNMENT IS
KIND OF IGNORING WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN TODAY'S WORLD.
>> SOCIETY TODAY, WHEN THINGS
WILL JUST HAPPEN A COMPROMISE OF
THE SEVERITY WITH WHICH YOU KNOW
THEY ARE STILL PART OF THIS, BUT
HAVING THE MEDIA HAVING THE PART
THAT IT HAS, TO TELL OUR
CITIZENS THAT NORMALLY WOULD.
>> I BELIEVE POLICE OFFICERS
HAVE TOO MUCH POWER TO NOT BE
RESPONSIBLE WITH IT.
THE POLICE OFFICER SHOULD HAVE
WENT TO THE TASER AS OPPOSED TO
THE GUN AND THEN MICHAEL BROWN
WOULD HAVE BEEN IN THE JAIL AS
OPPOSED TO THE MORGUE.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU TENSIONS CONTINUE IN
UKRAINE.
OFFICIALS THERE SAY PRO-RUSSIAN
REBELS FIRED ON A UKRAINIAN NAVY
VESSEL AS THE EU WEIGHED TOUGHER
SANCTIONS AGAINST RUSSIA.
TWO WILDFIRES IN NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA HAVE MERGED AND
NOW THREATENED AT LEAST 250
HOMES.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
ON THE NEWSHOUR.
PAUL SOLOMON REPORTS ON THE
CHALLENGES FACING PART-TIME
WORKERS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS
FOR WATCHING.